---
title: 'The Brazil’s capacity-building strategies in pandemic times'
date: 2020-05-07
---

The
[Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE)](https://www.ibge.gov.br/en/home-eng.html)
had to postpone the Population Census until 2021 and suspend the data collection
of its in-presence surveys due to the pandemic. As a result, to respond to the
new reality of remote work, IBGE’s
[National School of Statistical Sciences (ENCE)](http://www.ence.ibge.gov.br/)
increased the number of e-learning opportunities.

Self-paced online courses were released with no access restrictions. The courses
are about the fundamental principles of statistics, the preparation of graphs
and tables and about IBGE’s automated table retrieval system. In May, more
self-paced online courses will be available, in themes such as IT safety and
IBGE’s structure and production.

Another capacity-building action was to prepare an inventory of free open online
courses from accredited institutions in 5 management areas, considered strategic
by IBGE’s president: people development, bidding process, budget and finance,
planning and monitoring, and risk management. ENCE’ s Capacity-Building
Department applied some intelligence on this inventory producing a sort of
‘learning trail’ in each area, showing sequences of courses with pre-requisites
and related courses. A visual map for those trails was disseminated in IBGE’s
intranet, our main internal communication channel.

More e-learning opportunities were also included in a pre-existing program
called Capacity-Building for the 2020 Population Census. This program was a
result of combined efforts from ENCE and the Operational Department of Censuses,
which is linked to the president’s office. It encompasses several areas of
knowledge: procedures for updating enumeration areas and address registers for
statistical purposes, IBGE’s structure and production, IT safety, fund supply
management, didactics for census trainers, guidelines for publicizing the
Population Census, institutional partnerships, and sample household survey
practical experience. As Brazilian Population Census was postponed, IBGE gained
more time to develop staff in other areas such as ethics and integrity and
methods to approach informants. Particularly for that last theme, ENCE produced
a new self-paced online course on guidelines and procedures to conduct telephone
interviewing.

There were several challenges to implement those plans: IT infrastructure for
IBGE Virtual School was not prepared for the increase in access through
internet; the capacity-building team had to work under a lot of pressure in a
new mode of work; and several departments had to integrate efforts in a very
tight schedule. President’s and directors’ sponsorship was essential to render
improved IT capacity for IBGE Virtual School and new capacity-building solutions
in time as a result of combined efforts. Despite the troubled times, we consider
the Census staff ended up having an invaluable learning experience in a broader
array of areas, which will certainly contribute to a better prepared team for
the Population Census in 2021. It was also a unique opportunity to review and
update key work competencies for IBGE’s employees.
