---
title: Impact of COVID-19 on the implementation of statistical surveys in Iran
date: 2020-04-22
---

The unprecedented outbreak of the coronavirus and its resulting crisis have
created a huge challenge to the routines of many governmental, non-governmental,
civil society, organizations and businesses. The Statistical Centre of Iran
(CSI), like other National Statistical Offices (NSOs), is making necessary
adjustments to prevent disruptions in the production of high-quality time series
of statistical data and information required by policymakers, academics,
researchers and other statistical users at the lowest possible cost and in the
shortest possible time. Moreover, CSI considers itself responsible for observing
the health protocols of statistical enumerators as well as respondents to
surveys and censuses, and prioritizes keeping the valuable social capital.

The [Statistical Centre of Iran](https://www.amar.org.ir/english) coordinates
the National Statistical System and the production of official statistics as a
guide for national planning and policy making system. In the fulfillment of this
important national and professional mission, SCI has made a constant effort to
provide timely and quality statistics in historical ups and downs and in various
social, economic and political conditions. While this has allowed SCI to
continue the implementation of national censuses and statistical surveys under
any circumstances, there are times when adjustment have been necessary.

In the current COVID-19 situation, the SCI has found is necessary to obtain
information on initiatives and measures adopted by the National Statistical
Offices of other countries or the recommendations and instructions provided by
international statistical organizations and to establish direct contacts with
these authorities. Accordingly, a comprehensive study on the measures taken by
other countries in tackling with the consequences of this global crisis and its
impacts on statistical processes and the continuation of the activities of
national statistical offices has been conducted. The summary of this study
showed that shifting to methods that do not require face-to-face contact between
enumerators and respondents, eliminating field operations and replacing
traditional methods with less risky methods such as telephone interviewing,
computer-assisted telephone interviewing (CATI) and computer-assisted web
interviewing (CAWI) and paying special attention to registers and administrative
registers and moving towards register-based activities, are the most important
and common initiatives used in countries around the world.

Moreover, Statistical Centre of Iran (SCI) according to the guidelines and
directives issued by the Ministry of Health and Medical Education and the
National Headquarters for combating the COVID-19 epidemic, and considering the
importance of protecting health and safety of its staff under current critical
situation, has adopted several preventive and protective measures. In this line,
the SCI has shifted a part of its staff's activities and tasks to telecommuting
(working from home). In using these facilities, priority has been given to
individuals and groups at higher risk, such as staff with compromised immune
system, respiratory problems or heart disease, as well as pregnant women.

While observing the communicated health protocols and the use of telecommuting
(work-from-home) modalities for staff, SCI has not stopped or suspended the
implementation of any surveys. By using alternative methods such as telephone
interviewing and in some cases, changing the implementation date of the surveys,
it has tried to manage the consequences of the crisis as much as possible and
minimize its adverse consequences, and considers it as its duty to inform the
planners, decision makers and the public. The followings are some changes made
and the decisions taken to continue the surveys by the Statistical Centre of
Iran:

## The 2020 Surveys of the Statistical Centre of Iran

### 1. National Tourism Survey

**Objective of the survey:** This survey aims to provide statistics and
information in the field of tourism, including the number of trips and its
characteristics and tourism costs.

**Implementation method of this plan so far**: The survey has thus been
implemented using face-to-face interviews with households, and completing the
questionnaire (20 March--21 June) in the first two weeks after the end of
spring. However, tourism information collected from respondents during the
pandemic is likely to be subject to misreporing due to the national campaign
advising people "not to travel", which is well visible in the social media, and
related social pressure from the people. Accordingly, the questions of this
survey are among the sensitive questions and prevent collecting accurate
information.

**Changes forced by COVID-19:** Due to the existing conditions, this survey will
be implemented next year or in another statistical time, such as summer, when
the behavior of the statistical population has returned to normal.

### 2. Monthly Survey of the Number and Products of Large Livestock

**Objective of the survey:** This survey aims to estimate the number of
livestock (cattle and calves) on the survey day and the products (milk and
number of livestock supplied for slaughter) in the survey month.

**Implementation timing:** in the year 1398 , the fourth (last) week of each
month. In the year 1399, it will be implemented quarterly and in the fourth week
of the last month of each season.

**Data collection method so far:** Data is being collected through a
face-to-face interview in the first month and telephone interview in the second
and third months, as well as face-to-face interview with alternative holders in
the second and third months.

**Changes forced by COVID-19:** The face-to-face interview phase with
replacement holders has stopped and phone survey has replaced it for collecting
data from the holders.

### 3. Monthly Survey of the Number and Products of Small Livestock

**Objective of the survey:** This survey aims to estimate the number of small
livestock (sheep and lambs and goats) on the survey day, and products (milk and
number of livestock supplied for slaughter) in the survey season.

**Implementation timing:** The third week of the last month in every season

**Methodology of data collection:** Phone survey and face-to-face interview with
replaced holders.

**Changes forced by COVID-19:** The face-to-face interview phase with
replacement holders has stopped and phone survey has replaced it for collecting
data from the holders.

## 4. Survey of the Livestock Slaughtered in the National Slaughterhouses

**Objective of the survey:** This survey aims to calculate the amount of annual
red meat supplied by the slaughterhouses as one of the socio-economic
indicators.

**Implementation timing:** The first two weeks of every month.

**Methodology of data collection:** The survey questionnaire is uploaded on the
SIJAD System and updated in the month of Farvardin every year (20 March--19
April). Moreover, the soft questionnaire as a file is provided to the expert in
every province (to complete it in a paper format if needed). A unique username
and password are created for every slaughterhouse and provided to the
authorities of the survey in every province for different phases of the survey.

1. In the slaughterhouses having access to the Internet, the person in charge of
   the slaughterhouse completes the web-based questionnaire uploaded on the SIJ
   AD.
1. For the slaughterhouses without access to the Internet, the veterinarian
   supervisor available in the slaughterhouse receives the information from the
   person in charge of the slaughterhouse and then upload the information on the
   SIJAD System; otherwise, the person in charge of the slaughterhouse completes
   the paper questionnaire and sends it to the experts of the Deputy Department
   for Information and Statistics in respective province to upload it on the
   SIJAD.

**Changes forced by COVID-19:** For the slaughterhouses without having access to
the Internet, provincial expert is communicated to use the phone to collect data
as an alternative method if it is necessary to visit the slaughterhouse to
receive the completed questionnaire. Like the Survey of the Number and Products
of Large Livestock, this survey also allows the provincial experts to do survey
activities (simultaneously to insert the data into the SIJAD System and do
thematic editing while saving data) by teleworking (work from home).

## 5. Household Income and Expenditure and Survey

** Objectives of the survey:** The survey aims to annually estimate the average
of the total expenditure, food and income of the urban households and estimate
of the annual changes or averages in urban areas across the country and to
annually estimate the average of total expenditure, food and non-food items and
income of households in urban areas at provincial levels.

** Survey dates:** 20 April 2020--19 April 2021

** Methodology of data collection:** In a normal situation, the data are
collected by face-to-face interview with the sample households through the
questionnaire.

**Changes forced by COVID-19:** With respect to the sampling methods and the
existing phone numbers in the sample list, the phone survey is done (a special
instruction has been sent to the authorities in the provinces to tackle with the
households who do not cooperate in the survey, or for unauthorized phone number,
nonresponse, and other issues).

It has been decided that all the needed information for the entire season of
spring 2020 be collected in the month of Tir (21 June-â€“21 July 2020). By
considering the situation of the country and the results of the phone survey for
the households of the survey left from the winter of the year 1398, the method
of the survey in the year 1399 will be revised.

In order to gain households' cooperation and prevent any increase in the rate of
nonresponse, it has been decided to launch a publicity campaign and inform the
households and partner government agencies at national, provincial, and
sub-provincial levels about the methods of conducting the survey.

## 6. Time Use Survey

**Objective of the survey:** The aim of the survey is to collect information on
the type of different activities done by the people and time spent for them and
to study the changes in their lifestyles.

**Survey date:** The second week of the third months in spring and summer.

**Methodology of data collection:** Generally, this survey is implemented by
completing two questionnaires, namely: (1) a household questionnaire, and (2) an
individual questionnaire for persons aged 15 and over present in the household.
The household questionnaire is completed by a face-to-face interview with the
sample households. After completing the household questionnaire, the individual
questionnaire is delivered to the same household by the enumerator, to be
completed by the members aged 15 and over present in the household. Each of them
is asked to individually write down the activities they perform during a 24
hours period, following the instructions provided to them. Two days later, the
self-completed questionnaire is collected by the respective enumerator.

**Changes forced by COVID-19:**

1.              If the situation improves by 20 May 2020, it will be possible to conducte the survey in the fourth week of the month of Khordad of the year 1399 (13 -20 June 2020), instead of the second week of the mentioned month in order to ensure the households and operation staff health protocol observation.
2.              If the conditions do not change and the essential equipment is provided, the phone survey as an alternative method can be used.
3.              Otherwise, it is suggested that this survey be postponed to next spring and summer (2021).

## 7. Labour force Survey, Spring 2020

**Objective of the survey:** The Labour Force Survey is conducted in order to
obtain information on the structure and current condition of Labour force and
its changes. This objective is accomplished by "estimation of quarterly and
annual Labour force indicators at national and provincial levels", "estimation
of annual number of population in labour force at national and provincial
levels", "estimation of quarterly and annual changes in labour force at national
and provincial levels", and "estimation of annual changes in labour force
indicators at provincial levels".

**Statistical date:** Second or third calendar week (Saturday to Friday) of the
middle month of each season (reference week).

**Survey date:** Second or third calendar week of the middle month of each
season, namely, the week after the reference week.

**Methodology of data collection:** The data is collected usually by
face-to-face interview with the households by tablet device.

**Changes forced by COVID-19:** It has been decided that phone interviews be
used for collecting data in this survey in the month of Ordibehesht (20
April--20 May 2020) as an alternative method to deal with the crisis resulting
form COVID-19.

Since it is decided that the checker control some part of the collected
information by phone, it is emphasized that the enumerator get the fixed phone
number or cell phone of the households as far as possible.

In order to gain households' cooperation and prevent any increase in the rate of
nonresponse, it has been decided that the publicity campaign and inform the
households and partner government agencies at national, provincial, and
sub-provincial levels about the methods of conducting the survey start.

---

_This article was contributed by the
[Statistical Centre of Iran](https://www.amar.org.ir/english)._
