---
title:
  Interview with Sir Ian Diamond, National Statistician of the United Kingdom
date: 2020-05-22
---

Chief Statisticians from across the world are leading the response of National
Statistical Systems to the data challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic, even in the
context of major disruptions in day-to-day statistical operations. Sir Ian
Diamond, UK's National Statistician, shares in an interview how the Office of
National Statistics of the United Kingdom is innovating and working together
with the family of National Statistic Institutes around the globe to provide
timely and reliable data to monitor and contain to the spread of the disease and
its socio-economic impacts, and to inform the design of effective recovery
policies.

The following is a slightly edited version of an interview.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/scuLpWqVJpU" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

### What is the role of ONS in coordinating national COVID-19 data collection efforts in the UK?

The role of ONS is to lead the government’s statistical service. Right across
government, ONS works very closely with different arms of government to make
sure that there is coordination in the data that are prepared for COVID-19.

Particularly, we've worked closely with the Department of Health and Social Care
over the course of the epidemic to improve the reporting of daily deaths data.
We've worked very hard with the Treasury, and the Department of Business Energy
and Industrial Strategy to ensure that the economic data are being brought
together quickly and efficiently to the national effort. And I think as a
National Statistical Institute we have to step up and provide a coordinating
role, and that's something we've been very proud to do. What are the key
national sources of data for monitoring the pandemic? We have worked very hard
on this and I'm going to start with some new things that we've done, but I'll
also mention the way that we have adapted some of our business as usual.

On the new front, we've stepped up a new business survey that went out very,
very quickly to over 16,000 businesses and which aims to find out the way
they're reacting to the economic aspects of the pandemic. We still have a weekly
social survey which enables us to understand how people are responding to some
of the non-financial interventions that the government has put into place and
how they’re feeling about the data.

### We have a very new, very large survey that is collecting swabs from people to measure the prevalence of the virus in the population and collecting blood to measure the level antibodies in the population. By going back to people over time, this will allow us not only to estimate prevalence, but also the rates of transmission.

We have really worked hard in our Data Science campus to use some very
innovative ways of collecting data. For example, on footfall at major stations
following lockdown to look at the impact of that kind of lockdown. So, we have
innovated and brought very quickly a really large set of new data sources that
the government can use to be able to plan.

But at the same time, have worked very, very hard to make some of our “business
as usual” statistics, particularly our deaths data, as timely and as useful as
possible for government. We produced deaths data based on death registrations
with a lag of about 10 days. So, we've worked with our colleagues in the
Department of Health to get more timely data, which may not have the full
coverage but can help plan the government's response to the pandemic. And we've
used those deaths data to link with census data to understand the impact of the
virus on the people in different communities or with different demographic or
ethnic characteristics and bringing those out regularly has really helped the
government to plan.

Our labor force survey remains incredibly important in planning, and I’ll turn
to that a little later. And we really have worked hard to make sure that our
measurement of GDP and inflation are available, ready and accurate as the
government plans its way out of the economic challenges that the pandemic has
brought.

### How is ONS ensuring the continuity and quality of key statistical operations in the face of restrictions to conduct field operations?

We, along with many other statistical institutes, have had to stand down our
face-to-face field work. That has meant that we have had to very quickly move to
telephone data collection for our labor force survey. The good news is that we
knew something about the biases that already existed, so we're able to adjust
for that. However, it’s very, very important to do that very, very quickly.
Migration statistics were needing to work very quickly towards use
administrative of data. So, in many ways, some of the challenges that we have
faced are things that we would have wanted to do very, very quickly. In
addition, when it comes to measuring inflation, we have used things like web
scraping of prices rather than face-to-face data collection. So, we have been
quickly and, I hope, effectively changing some of the ways in which we collect
data to ensure that we are able to provide the data that our government needs.

### How does the ONS strike the right balance between timeliness and quality of data in the current emergency situation?

I think this is a really good question. Government needs timely data; there is
no question about that. But equally, government does not need wrong information
to make poor policy. So, while you can talk about quality against timeliness,
you absolutely need really to be thinking about what can you do with quality in
the short term, as well as, perhaps, improving on that in the long term.

So, perhaps the best example of this might be on deaths data, where we know that
our deaths registration data will be the most comprehensive, but it comes with a
10-day lag. So, we've worked the Department of Health and Social Care to be able
to produce daily data of all the deaths where there was a positive test for
COVID-19. There will be some cases that are not in those data—for example, where
the practitioner has not got a positive test but feels that the cause of death
was COVID-19. But we believe that the data that we do have are very close to
good and therefore good for timely reporting.

We're also looking very hard at some fast economic indicators that we could
bring over the next few months to enable government to understand what is
happening in the economy while waiting for, if you like, the monthly GDP data.
What is ONS doing to ensure that relevant data and information on the spread and
impact of COVID-19 is open and readily accessible to the public and
policymakers, while at the same time ensuring privacy and confidentiality of
personal information?

It is incredibly important that we are open with the data that we use. And we
have developed over the last few years a secure research service that allows
researchers to access data against an ethical agreement when the research
project that they wish to do is demonstrably in the public interest. We have
worked very hard during the pandemic to enable researchers, for the first time,
to access this secure research service from their homes and this is, I think, a
major breakthrough.

I talked earlier about a very large study that we are doing which is enabling us
to monitor COVID-19 prevalence and the level of antibodies in the population.
The protocol for this study was made open and available before the data were
collected. There are regular announcements and publications of the results, and
the data are available in real time in the secure research service for secondary
analysis. This is just an example; there are many more.

### What tools or platforms are being used to communicate information related to COVID-19 to users, including the general public?

The list is limitless. Clearly, we have our regular publications, and a number
of ad hoc publications which bring data to the public very, very quickly. We are
also feeding in to government policy on a regular basis, so the government’s
dashboards have a lot of ONS data. In addition, we use different means of
communications, such as social media, to get to people. And we are regularly
doing interviews, in television, on radio and in other fora, to make sure that
our results are communicated in a way that gives the maximum exposure to the
population.

### Is ONS following and/or adapting any practices indeed collection either here in the UK or globally for data comparability across countries?

This is a very important challenge and one of the questions that is always asked
is, is there a [ranking] table showing the challenge faced by different
countries from COVID-19? And my answer is that, sadly, it is not possible to
have any kind of coherent [ranking] table. You can see which countries are most
affected, and which are perhaps less affected. But you can't really make a
[ranking] table for two reasons. One, because what is reported is not as alike
as one might like, as some countries do things based on samples, other countries
have different timings, etc., and being able to compare the number of deaths is
actually very difficult. Secondly, we know that COVID-19 is impacted by, for
example, demographic factors, so that age structure of the population is
important. And we know that it is likely to be transmitted more in inner cities
where there is high density of population, so the degree of urbanization of the
population is going to be important. One really does need to be very careful in
making international comparisons.

The other thing which moves slightly away from that, but it's still incredibly
important, is to recognize that there will be deaths, not directly from
COVID-19, but which are a result of it. And to capture them one needs a way of
using all-cause mortality excess deaths. And again, I think there is real
potential opportunities to do that, but there remain challenges in for the two
reasons that I just described.

### In your view, what are the most promising innovations in terms of the use of new data sources and new methods to address the need for detailed, timely and high-quality information on the pandemic? Can you tell us more about how ONS Data Science Campus, for example, is contributing in this regard?

I think there are enormous opportunities at all times to innovate, and I don't
think one should wait for a crisis like a pandemic to innovate. That's why we
have a Data Science Campus, where we can, for example, use web scraping to
understand the number of people who are asking for Google Maps around places
with particularly high footfall. That is important. We have used web scraping as
well to identify the availability across the country of the sort of goods that
people buy in a crisis. For example, we knew at the beginning of the lockdown
that there was great difficulty buying hand sanitizer anywhere, and we could
point to where it was possible to buy it. We've taken that basket of goods and
followed their prices over time and—given that are our Prime Minister has just
had a baby—, the good news for him is that we can say that nappies have reduced
in price. So, we were able to follow all these kinds of things very much.

The Data Science Campus has an enormous role to play. I would also say that it
is not just the Data Science Campus that has elevated data innovation, being
absolutely brilliant, but also some of the innovations around very quick
reporting. I've mentioned our social survey. We can stop data intake on a Friday
at four o'clock, and we have results delivered to the government on Monday by
midday. That kind of speed of innovation, of delivery, is incredibly important
at a time like this, and requires innovation right across the organization, as
does—to go back to the very large prevalence survey—the fact that those data are
going into the secure research service in real time. It takes an enormous amount
of effort from across the office to innovate. To do it at such pace, and when
we're all working from home as well, makes this a really exciting and innovative
time.

### What are your views on how new solutions developed in this phase, can become our new normal? Is there something we're learning from this crisis and the way national statistical offices are adapting to it?

I think there are so many new normals. Let me just start giving one: Alongside
many other National Statistics Offices across the world we have moved very
quickly to work from home. That brings with it both opportunities and
challenges. You're ensuring people's wellbeing when they're working, and perhaps
on their own, while they're trying to manage caring responsibilities with
children being at home as well, making sure that everybody feels that they are
contributing—these are things that we absolutely have to worry about as the
National Statistics office.

But at the same time, some of the things that we have learned will become a new
normal. I believe, for example, that we need to be thinking very much about more
flexible work in the future, perhaps more than we have in the past. We can work
much more, perhaps on a basis of trust with our colleagues. And those kinds of
changes in the way we work are, it seems to me, really positive. At the same
time, we have really upped our speed in which we've used some administrative
data. That's a new normal that we need to seize and if we can stand up things
very quickly in a crisis, why can't we do things like that all the time? Now, I
recognize that some people have been working incredibly hard and we need to
build things into a sustainable way for all our teams, but at the same time,
we've demonstrated that we can do things at pace with quality and that are
incredibly relevant to government decision-making. Those are the things that we
can't possibly afford to lose.

### What are ONS’ plans for the post COVID-19 period, including for addressing the new data needs to understand the impact on the economy and all other sectors of society?

I think the first thing to say is that it is a very brave person who says “post
COVID-19”, because some of the coronaviruses that exist in the population have
been around for over 200 years. So it is extremely likely, in my view, that we
will move into a time where we are controlling COVID-19, where it is in the
population but at a very low level, and part of the control will be through
treatments and vaccinations. However, it may be some time before we get there.
In the meantime, we absolutely need to be working on ways of identifying and
acting on outbreaks very quickly. ONS has been part of the government's
strategies for using data and data science to identify outbreaks, and it will
continue so to do.

We equally know that the economy is going to take a very big hit from the
government actions, the right government actions, to impact on COVID-19. And
given that plan, we need to work tirelessly to make this recession a steep
V-shaped recession, if it's at all possible. The last thing we need is an
L-shaped recession, because an L-shaped recession would push many people into
unemployment and poverty, and that would result in negative effects on health
and increased mortality. So there is an enormous amount that the government
knows it needs to do to make sure we come out of this economic challenge
quickly.

And ONS has to be at the heart of that through fast economic indicators, through
ensuring that our measurements of unemployment and the skill bases in the
country are quick and early. Our job is to react to changes in the economy and
measure those changes. That's why a National Statistical Institute is always in
a state of change. And, so ONS will be reacting very, very quickly to the kinds
of decisions that are needed to provide data, to inform government policy and to
provide data on the changing economy, and to help government steer us on a
course out of the hits that the economy is going to take.

### How are you adapting statistical capacity development efforts to the new situation? For example, how can developed countries continue providing technical assistance and collaborating with statistical offices in developing countries?

I figure it's incredibly important that right across the globe we are supporting
each other, sharing best practices and working to make sure that we are
supporting and informing all our governments. ONS has a number of partners with
countries, including in various low-income countries. For example, we met
recently with our partners from Rwanda, from Ghana and from Kenya for a
discussion around what we were all doing to support our governments through this
COVID-19 pandemic, how we might innovate and how we might support each other. As
we go through the pandemic, we will continue to share best practices and support
each other, getting back to helping people with the next round of censuses or
other important statistical priorities.

**We are a global family of National Statistic Institutes. It is critical in my
view that we work together for the global good.**

_Sir Ian is the UK's National Statistician, Head of the
[Government Statistical Service](https://gss.civilservice.gov.uk/) (GSS) and
Chief Executive of the
[UK Statistics Authority](https://www.statisticsauthority.gov.uk/). He provides
overall leadership for the Office for National Statistics (ONS) and the
statistics profession across government. Sir Ian advises ministers, the Cabinet
Secretary and senior officials on the production, dissemination and use of
statistics across government._

_Professor Sir Ian David Diamond, FBA, FRSE, FAcSS is the former Principal and
Vice-Chancellor of the University of Aberdeen. His previous roles include Chief
Executive of the Economic and Social Research Council, Chair of the Research
Councils UK Executive Group, Deputy Vice-Chancellor at the University of
Southampton and Chairman of the Social Security Advisory Committee._
