---
title: 'Samoa Bureau of Statistics COVID-19 response'
date: 2020-05-04
---

_This article is also available in
[Russian](/samoa-bureau-of-statistics-covid19-response-RU.pdf)._<br/><br/> Samoa
is one of the few countries that have yet to confirm a positive case of
COVID-19. However, the partial lockdown from 21 March to 2 May 2020, and the
closure of borders since 25 March to date, have impacted on some of the on-going
data collections activities, scheduled trainings and also stakeholder
consultations. Some key impacts are listed in this note.

### 1. Census for agriculture, livestock and fisheries 2020

The Census for Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries 2020, involving about 80
personnel, was planned for 6 weeks of data collection staring in March using
tablets. After one week of data collection in the field, the State of Emergency
(SOE) was declared. Hence all the 80 personnel were called back and the census
was put on hold. About 10 of them were full-time staff, while the rest were
temporary enumerators who we had to let go to await the end of the SOE status.
Because of the long break, we are concerned that we have to reallocate our
budget in order to re-train the whole team before going out again later this
year. We are also anticipating some losses of workers due to the long wait and
lack of pay during the SOE. The challenge is to try and complete the data
collection of the Ag census within this year.

### 2. Household income and expenditure survey (HIES), 2018

We had plans to host a stakeholder consultations in May of this year to finalise
the analysis of the results and report of the Household income and expenditure
survey (HIES) 2018. We expected the technical assistance from the
[Pacific Community (SPC)](https://sdd.spc.int/) in New Caledonia in March/April
this year to help us prepare for this activity. Unfortunately, we had to
postpone the SPC mission as well as the stakeholder consultations to another
time. To make up for the loss, we are using emails and video conferencing to
review the results with SPC. We have yet to set a date for the stakeholder
consultations, given the size of the group, as we face challenges in the
procurement of teleconference and video conference equipment to host big virtual
meetings if the SOE is extended.

### 3. Weekly market survey of agriculture production for the monthly Consumer price index (CPI)

Shipping services between the islands were also cancelled during the SOE in the
first 4 weeks. This has significantly disrupted our weekly survey on our biggest
island (Savaiâ€™i), and we had no choice but to use only the data from the main
island (Upolu), where the capital of Apia is located, to compile the monthly
Consumer price index (CPI) report for April 2020. We noted that the closure of
the inter-island ferry services and the early closedown of the markets at 3pm
daily during the SOE has disrupted and brought down the demand and supply of
produce at the markets, which will also impact on statistical trends. The
challenge is to build the capacity of the staff on how to manage statistical
collections and analysis during any crisis like the COVID-19.

### 4. Arrival and departure statistics

As Samoa depended mostly on tourism and remittances for revenue and foreign
exchange, the closure of international borders brought a full-stop to tourism
earnings, while the lockdown overseas also decreased the volume of remittances
being sent home, which of course poses a big impact on the GDP estimates. The
challenge is to build the capacity of the staff on how to manage statistical
collections and analysis during any crisis like the COVID-19. The lockdown also
prevented our office to code and enter arrivals and departures for migration
statistics on a daily basis. On the positive side, we managed to catch up with
our delayed reports and we have extra hands which we have reallocated to help
out with other statistical services. On the negative side, we do not have
migration statistics to report on a monthly basis.

### 5. Civil registration and vital statistics

Our major revenue collection comes from the fees that the public paid for the
registration of births, deaths and marriages. Before the lockdown, the average
collection was about
$3,000 tala per day. However, during the SOE lockdown, the
public bus services were also put on hold, except for taxis and private
vehicles. As a result, there was limited affordable transport for the public to
visit the civil registration office, which actually led to less registration of
vital events, as well as reduced revenue to about $800
tala per day. We see the opportunity here to develop an application to enable
the public to register vital events on line during such difficult times and the
challenge is how to reach that goal.

### 6. Demograhic and health survey-Multiple indicator cluster survey, 2019

We were very fortunate to have completed the data collection of the Demograhic
and health survey-Multiple indicator cluster survey (DHS-MICS) 2019 by
February 2020. In fact, before the SOE for the COVID-19 was declared in March
2020, we also encountered another two months of SOE in September-December 2019,
due to the outbreak of the Measles epidemic in Samoa. Originally, we targeted
May 2020 to release the survey results, but due to the Measles outbreak and now
the COVID-19, we have to reschedule all our analysis and dissemmination
activities to another time causing delays to the release of essential health
data. The challenge is to get the results out as soon as possible.

### 7. National identification system project

The National ID project that the
[Samoa Bureau of Statistics (SBS)](https://www.sbs.gov.ws/) is leading was
officially approved by the government in July 2018. It is funded by the World
Bank. The aim was to have the digital national ID ready in time for the national
election in March/April 2021. However, due to the SOE closure of borders, not
only in Samoa but also the international ports, we have not been able to bring
on board the international consultants that we have hired to help with the
project by April/May 2020. As a result, we are also using video conferencing and
emails to communicate while awaiting a better time to meet them in person. We
are also anticipating delays in achieving targets on time and we may not be able
to get the ID ready by the national election day, due to the COVID-19 lockdown.
The challenge is to keep going despite all the difficulties because the whole
world is in the same situation.

---

_Note prepared by the office of the Government Statistician of Samoa (
[https://www.sbs.gov.ws/](https://www.sbs.gov.ws/))._
