import MdxLayout from '../src/components/mdx-layout';
export default MdxLayout;

The global COVID-19 crisis is already affecting critical operations across the
entire global statistical system, and national and international statistical
organizations need to take immediate actions to ensure the continuity of key
statistical compilation activities and the continued availability of data to
inform emergency mitigation actions by governments and all sectors of society.

Senior management in statistical organizations are working together with their
own front-line managers and IT teams, and with partners at the national and
global levels, to deal with the current emergency. This includes coordinating to
establish new procedures and workflows, collaboration in virtual teams, and
implementing secure remote data access and data exchange capabilities for NSO
staff members to perform their jobs, and for the providers of data inputs and
the users of statistical outputs to remain effectively linked together
throughout the statistical value chain. It also includes addressing the
increased need for data openness and accessibility to meet the urgent demand for
reliable and accurate information on the spreading and impact of the virus as
well as its impact on people's lives and all sectors of the economy.

Stakeholders form across the global statistical community are ready to support
National Statistical Offices address the multiple challenges of the current
crisis. As part of this efforts, the United Nations Statistics division is
leading a collaborative with the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development
Data and Open Data Watch, to develop a web-based platform to share guidance,
best practices, information resources and tools to help statistical
organizations function during an emergency situation in which most of their
staff is suddenly unable to work on-site.
