---
title:
  'COVID-19 widens gulf of global data inequality, while national statistical
  offices step up to meet new data demands'
date: 2020-06-05
slug: covid-19-widens-gulf-of-data-inequality
description:
  The novel coronavirus pandemic has exacted a heavy toll, with more than 6
  million cases worldwide and nearly 400,000 deaths from COVID-19 as of this
  writing. Much of the world remains on lockdown, adding loss of livelihood and
  financial suffering to the grave health impacts of the virus.
images:
  - ./nso-survey-image1.jpg
  - ./nso-survey-image2.jpg
  - ./nso-survey-image3.jpg
  - ./nso-survey-image5.jpg
  - ./nso-survey-image7.jpg
  - ./nso-survey-image8.jpg
tags:
  - ensuring-continuity
---

import Img from 'gatsby-image';
import { Box } from '@undataforum/gatsby-theme-theme-ui';

_This article is also available in [Russian](./ru.pdf)._

The novel coronavirus pandemic has exacted a heavy toll, with more than 6
million cases worldwide and nearly 400,000 deaths from COVID-19 as of this
writing. Much of the world remains on lockdown, adding loss of livelihood and
financial suffering to the grave health impacts of the virus.

National statistical systems have not been exempt from the ravages of the
disease. At a time when the need for high-quality, timely data is more urgent
than ever, national statistical systems have been hobbled by restrictions on
face-to-face survey interviewing due to social and physical distancing measures.
Nonetheless, governments, civil society, and the general public are increasingly
turning to national statistical offices (NSOs) for reliable data to understand
the health, economic, and social impacts of the pandemic. NSOs are also playing
a critical role of validation and quality assurance across the statistical
system, given the steady demand for more and newer data as we try to adjust to
this ‘new normal’.

In the midst of this crunch, the
[Statistics Division of the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs](http://unstats.un.org/)
and the [World Bank's Development Data Group](http://data.worldbank.org/), in
coordination with the five UN regional commissions, launched a global online
survey to monitor the nature, scale, and scope of the impact of the coronavirus
crisis on statistical agencies, as well as to identify new data needs. The
survey was designed to inform the global statistical community on how to better
respond to the immediate needs of countries facing the most urgent challenges,
and plan a coordinated effort to navigate through the crisis and its impact over
the next few months. A second wave of the survey will be launched later this
month.

The survey results, covering the 122 countries that responded to the
questionnaire, are summarized in a report available
[here](/statistical-programmes/covid19-nso-survey/), clearly underscore the
tremendous challenges faced by national statistical offices as a result of the
COVID-19 crisis. The results also include information on the measures being
taken by statistical agencies to mitigate negative impacts and meet new data
demands, as well as the areas that require priority support from partners.

Here are three key messages that stand out from the data.

First, **the COVID-19 pandemic is exacerbating global data inequalities**, as
statistical agencies in countries with the least resources are also those facing
the greatest challenges in coping with the crisis, let alone adapting data
collection operations to this new reality. Among other things, **the pandemic
has impacted the operations of the vast majority of national statistical
offices, requiring office closures, telework and the suspension of face-to-face
interviews**. 65 percent of NSO headquarters offices are partially or fully
closed, 90 percent have instructed staff to work from home, and 96 percent have
partially or fully stopped face-to-face data collection.

**Proportion of National Statistical Offices that have partially or fully
restricted access to their main office building, by region**

<Box mb={3}>
  <Img
    fluid={props.images[0]}
    title="[Office closure]"
    alt="[Office closure]"
  />
</Box>

<Box mb={3}>
  <Img
    fluid={props.images[1]}
    title="[Office closure]"
    alt="[Office closure]"
  />
</Box>

**Proportion of National Statistical Offices that have introduced telework for
at least some of their staff, by region**

<Box mb={3}>
  <Img
    fluid={props.images[2]}
    title="[Working remotely]"
    alt="[Working remotely]"
  />
</Box>

**Statistical operations have been hardest hit in low- and lower middle-income
countries**, while better resourced statistical systems in East Asia, Europe,
and North America have largely been able to protect their essential operations.
Nine out of ten NSOs in low- and lower middle-income countries saw the pandemic
blunt their ability to meet international reporting requirements, as opposed to
one in two NSOs in high-income countries. The report details similar trends in
the production of essential monthly or quarterly statistics, the production of
administrative data statistics, and survey operations, where NSOs in Eastern and
South-Eastern Asia, Europe and Northern America, and Oceania have been
relatively less affected..

<Box mb={3}>
  <Img
    fluid={props.images[3]}
    title="[Is the current covid-19 pandemic affecting your aiblity to]"
    alt="[Is the current covid-19 pandemic affecting your aiblity to]"
  />
</Box>

Second, **the global statistical community and donors must urgently provide
technical assistance and financial resources to the national statistical offices
most in need of support**. We find that nine in ten national statistical offices
in low- and lower middle-income countries are facing difficulties operating
during the pandemic due to funding constraints, as more than half have seen
funding cuts. 73 NSOs – 61 percent of those responding to this question in the
survey – stated the need for additional external support to face the challenges
associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. Priority areas for support in this group
of countries include technical assistance and capacity building, financial
support, and software for remote data collection.

<Box mb={3}>
  <Img
    fluid={props.images[4]}
    title="[Top three support priorities by income group]"
    alt="[Top three support priorities by income group]"
  />
</Box>

Finally, **the pandemic has highlighted the importance of the digital
revolution, while opening up new possibilities to strengthen and modernize core
data collection programmes as the backbone of national data systems**. Despite
the many disruptions caused by the pandemic, national statistical offices are
taking up the mantle of responding to new data needs and demands. We find that
the majority of NSOs are implementing surveys on COVID-19 and its impacts, and
are either planning or setting up national platforms to address the data needs
of their government and citizens. To monitor and assess the impacts of COVID-19,
in lieu of face-to-face surveys, statistical offices around the world have been
relying on alternative data collection modes and data sources, most prominently
phone surveys (58 percent) and administrative data (53 percent), in addition to
online surveys (34 percent). However, as highlighted in the report, NSOs in low-
and lower middle-income countries rely significantly less often on remote
sensing and satellite imagery, revealing technology and infrastructure deficits
that must be addressed by donors during this fraught time.

<Box mb={3}>
  <Img
    fluid={props.images[5]}
    title="[alternative nontraditional data sources approaches to analyze or monitor aspects of the covid19 pandemic]"
    alt="[alternative nontraditional data sources approaches to analyze or monitor aspects of the covid19 pandemic]"
  />
</Box>

The UN system and the World Bank, in coordination with the UN regional
commissions, intend to continue monitoring the situation in the coming months
through multiple follow-up rounds to this survey. The feedback we receive from
NSOs will be critical in helping us better support our statistical partners, as
the global statistical community continue to play its vital role in informing
all sectors of society during this unprecedented crisis. We are committed to
supporting countries to turn this crisis into an opportunity to invest smartly
in more resilient and modernized integrated data/statistical systems.

This
[blog post](https://blogs.worldbank.org/opendata/covid-19-widens-gulf-global-data-inequality-while-national-statistical-offices-step-up)
and report were simultaneously published on the World Bank website.

### Resources:

To read the full survey report, please visit
[please visit this link](/statistical-programmes/covid19-nso-survey/) or
[data.worldbank.org](http://data.worldbank.org/).

---

_**Haishan Fu** is the Director of the World Bank’s Development Data Group,
overseeing its global development monitoring and open data initiative, surveys
and other technical advisory services, and global statistical programs such as
the International Comparison Program. In her capacity as the Ex-Officio member
of the WBG Data Council and the Co-Chair of the Development Data Directors
Group, Haishan leads and coordinates the development and implementation of the
Bank’s development data agenda. She has been an active leader in the global
statistical community, having served or currently serving as a member of the UN
Secretary General’s Independent Expert Advisory Group on Data Revolution for
Sustainable Development, Council Member of the International Statistical
Institute, and Co-Chair of the Global Steering Committee of the Global Strategy
to Improve Agricultural and Rural Statistics, among others._
[Read More](https://www.worldbank.org/en/about/people/h/haishan-fu)

_**Stefan Schweinfest** was appointed Director of the Statistics Division
(UNSD/DESA) in July 2014. Under his leadership, the Division compiles and
disseminates global statistical information, develops standards and norms for
statistical activities including the integration of geospatial, statistical and
other information, and supports countries' efforts to strengthen their national
statistical and geospatial systems._
[Read More](https://unstats.un.org/home/Stefan-Schweinfest.cshtml)
