---
title:
  'Coping with the pandemic crisis: what do national statistical offices need
  the most?'
date: 2020-08-16
slug: priority-needs-of-national-statistical-offices
description:
  The novel coronavirus pandemic continues to ravage countries across the world
  taking a heavy toll, with more than 25 million cases and over 750,000 deaths
  globally as of this writing. Most countries are still under some restrictions
  to limit the spread of the virus and continue to operate in emergency mode.
  National statistical systems also continue to face tremendous challenges as a
  result of the crisis at a time when data are more urgently needed than ever to
  inform critical interventions to save lives, restart the economy and address
  the long-term impact of the pandemic.
images:
  - ./nso-survey-2-image1.png
  - ./nso-survey-2-image2.png
---

import Img from 'gatsby-image';
import { Box } from '@undataforum/gatsby-theme-theme-ui';

_By **Gero Carletto** and **Francesca Perucci**_

The novel coronavirus pandemic continues to ravage countries across the world
taking a heavy toll, with more than 25 million cases and over 750,000 deaths
globally as of this writing. Most countries are still under some restrictions to
limit the spread of the virus and continue to operate in emergency mode.
National statistical systems also continue to face tremendous challenges as a
result of the crisis at a time when data are more urgently needed than ever to
inform critical interventions to save lives, restart the economy and address the
long-term impact of the pandemic.

The
[Statistics Division of the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs](http://unstats.un.org/)
and the [World Bank's Development Data Group](http://data.worldbank.org/), in
coordination with the five
[UN regional commissions](http://www.regionalcommissions.org/about/the-regional-commissions/what-we-do/),
just released the results of the second round of a global online survey to
monitor the impact of the coronavirus crisis on National Statistical Offices
(NSOs). The survey provides key information to help identify areas that require
priority support from partners and develop plans for longer term interventions.

While the [first round](../covid19-nso-survey/covid19-nso-survey-report.pdf) of
the survey provided a snapshot of the situation in May 2020, the
[second round](../covid19-nso-survey/covid19-nso-survey-report-2.pdf) looks at
how restrictions and disruptions have receded or become more widespread over
time and at how national and international stakeholders are coordinating their
response to the data challenges posed by the pandemic.

The responses collected from the chief statisticians of over 100 countries help
understand concrete support needs and how they may best be addressed to help
countries navigate this unprecedented crisis. They also highlight stark
differences across regions and income levels, as statistical agencies in low-
and middle-income countries face the highest level of disruption to their
operations and have the greatest needs in terms of technical assistance and
financial resources.

While statistical agencies play a vital role in producing timely and reliable
data to help governments respond effectively to the socio-economic and health
impacts of the pandemic, NSOs in low- and lower-middle income countries draw
attention to insufficient coordination of national statistical systems in the
response to the pandemic, lack of appropriate infrastructures to allow for a
prompt and effective conversion to remote operations and urgent need for
additional support to face these challenges.

Here are some key findings:

- **While many offices have reopened and are gradually returning to face-to-face
  data collection, the majority still operate in emergency mode with some or all
  staff working from home.** Even though remote work has become the new norm for
  many, up to 20 percent of offices face constraints in their ability to work
  from home due to inadequate ICT equipment or infrastructure. **This
  underscores the need for more decisive investments in digital technology, to
  support remote work, training, data collection, and data storage, which are
  vital for NSOs to operate during the pandemic.**

<Box mb={3}>
  <Img
    fluid={props.images[0]}
    title="[Office closure]"
    alt="[Office closure]"
  />
</Box>

- **Short-term statistical production, which heavily relies on traditional
  face-to-face methods, continues to be affected, with low and middle-income
  countries impacted the most.** Three out of four countries in that income
  group saw their production of monthly and quarterly statistics negatively
  affected by the pandemic. In contrast, two thirds of the responding countries
  in the high-income group reported that their production of short-term
  statistics had been completely unaffected, which may be partly attributed to
  their heavier reliance on alternative administrative data sources and remote
  data collection modes. **This underlines the need for smart investments to
  build the necessary infrastructure and the right spectrum of skillsets across
  national statistical systems data producers in low and middle income
  countries.**

- **Coordination of national statistical systems needs strengthening in many
  countries to effectively respond to the COVID-19 pandemic-related data
  needs.** Coordination seemed to be most challenging in Oceania and sub-Saharan
  Africa, where only around one third of the reporting countries showed
  satisfaction with the current level of coordination. A well-coordinated
  national statistical system is crucial for efficient data collection and
  dissemination to meet the needs of policymakers. **A stronger coordination and
  stewardship role of National Statistical Offices may be needed to address
  these coordination problems and enhance effectiveness of individual efforts.**

- **More assistance is needed to help NSOs mitigate the challenges of COVID-19
  pandemic, particularly in low and lower-middle income countries.** Most
  countries in this group voiced a strong need for every type of support,
  including equipment and infrastructure. Two thirds or more of upper
  middle-income countries also reported requiring technical assistance, training
  and financial support. **To counter the global data inequalities exacerbated
  by the COVID-19 pandemic, the global statistical community and donors must
  urgently provide technical assistance and digital infrastructure support to
  the national statistical offices most in need.**

<Box mb={3}>
  <Img
    fluid={props.images[1]}
    title="[Need for additional support to face the challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic]"
    alt="[Is the current covid-19 pandemic affecting your aiblity to]"
  />
</Box>

**NSOs have voiced their concerns and identified clear needs.** Of particular
relevance to combat the growing inequities in statistical production is a **call
for strengthening the technical capacity and digital infrastructure** that are
critical for NSOs, in their coordinating role in the national statistical
system, to continue operating effectively and take advantage of the
fast-evolving data collection methods and technologies. **The time is now for
development partners to launch a strong, coordinated effort of targeted
investments for the development of new data skills and upgrading of digital
infrastructures** for countries in greatest need and weakest in human
capabilities and physical infrastructure to be able to modernize and innovate.

This blog post and the report of the second round of a global online survey to
monitor the impact of the coronavirus crisis on National Statistical Offices
(NSOs) were simultaneously published on the World Bank website

### Resources:

Read the full survey report:
[Monitoring the State of Statistical Operations under the COVID-19 Pandemic](/survey/covid-19-nso-survey-report-2.pdf).

Read the [blog post](/statistical-programmes/covid19-nso-survey/) by Haishan Fu,
Director of the Development Economics Data Group and Stefan Schweinfest,
Director of the United Nations Statistics Division, on how COVID-19 is widening
the gulf of global data inequality.

---

#### About the authors:

_**Gero Carletto** is a Lead Economist and the Manager of the Living Standards
Measurement Survey (LSMS), a long-standing survey program at the World Bank. He
is also currently managing the Center for Development Data (C4D2), a Rome-based
hub of the World Bank’s Development Data Group dedicated to fostering
methodological innovation and strengthening capacity in household surveys in
low- and middle-income countries. Gero has more than twenty-five years of
experience in the collection, analysis and dissemination of household survey
data. He has published more than 80 articles, books and book chapters on various
topics ranging from poverty, migration, agriculture and rural development, as
well as data collection methods and measurement issues. He has previously worked
for various United Nations’ agencies and for the International Food Policy
Research Institute (IFPRI). Gero holds a Ph.D. and a M.Sc. in Agricultural and
Resource Economics from the University of California at Berkeley and a Laurea
cum Laude in Statistics from the University of Siena, Italy._
[Read More](https://www.worldbank.org/en/about/people/g/gero-carletto)

_**Francesca Perucci** is the chief of the Development Data and Outreach Branch
in the United Nations Statistics Division, where she oversees the work on SDGs.
Between 2002 and 2012, she was responsible for the programme on the global
monitoring of the MDGs. For a number of years, she also managed the capacity
development programme of the Statistics Division to strengthen statistical
systems in countries, with a focus on statistics and indicators to monitor
development and the MDGs. Ms. Perucci initiated her career in the UN as a
technical adviser on gender and social statistics. Since then, in different
positions within the UN system, she has focused on developing and promoting the
use of statistics and indicators to monitor progress in development and to
inform policies. Between 2012 and 2014, she was assistant Director at the United
Nations Population Division, where her work focused on demographic analysis and
the substantive support to the intergovernmental process on population and
development. She has authored a number of articles on social and gender
statistics, two issues of the UN publication The World’s Women, in 1995 and
2000, and several statistical manuals on gender statistics and social
statistics. She was the lead author of the MDG Report from 2005 to 2012._
