---
title:
  'Using telephone interviews for household surveys: A conversation with Prof.
  Jim Lepkowski'
date: 2020-05-15
slug: using-telephone-interview-for-household-surveys
images:
  - ./flowchart-telephone-survey.jpg
---

import Img from 'gatsby-image';
import { Box } from 'theme-ui';

_This article is also available in
[Russian](/using-telephone-interview-for-household-surveys-RU.pdf)._<br/><br/>Household
surveys play an important role in meeting national data needs.[^1] But with the
ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, household survey programmes in many countries have
been impacted in different ways. While some countries have started to use
telephone and web surveys for their national surveys, many still rely on
face-to-face interviews. It is these operations that have been affected the most
by the pandemic. Is now the right moment for countries that have been relying on
face-to-face interviews to make the switch to telephone interviews, given that
the mobile phone penetration is already quite high in most of the countries?
[Professor Jim Lepkowski](https://sph.umich.edu/faculty-profiles/lepkowski-james.html)
of the University of Michigan, a leading expert on survey methodology, shares
his thoughts on designing and conducting telephone surveys in a conversation
with the UN Statistics Division (UNSD).

## “We should distinguish telephone interviewing from telephone surveys.”

**UNSD:** _Could I start with a big question, that is, what is the future for
telephone interviewing? It has been used often in developed countries. How do
you see it being adopted by developing countries? I have seen that establishing
a sampling frame of telephone numbers can be challenging, among others._

**Jim:** First, we need to keep in mind that telephone surveys replaced many
face-to-face surveys because, at the time, they were much cheaper to do. And
cheaper telephone surveys made it possible for more surveys to be done. Private
companies and university researchers who never had enough money for face-to-face
data collection could do their own surveys for much lower costs per completed
interview.

We should also distinguish telephone interviewing from telephone surveys. There
are different circumstances where telephone interviews are used in surveys. In
longitudinal surveys, in which the same households or persons are interviewed
multiple times, households or persons may be initially interviewed face-to-face,
but subsequent interviews can be done by telephone. This kind of mode switching
is again done to save money. Telephone numbers recorded during face-to-face
interviews are used for later calling, eliminating worry about a telephone frame
and sampling from it.

Most telephone interviewing early on in the 1970s was being done in surveys that
are only carried out through telephone. They required sampling telephone numbers
to start. The frame issue became of major importance. Where is a survey
organization going to get a list of sample telephone numbers to call? What kind
of materials are available? And really importantly, what are the properties of
the available frames? Are there households or persons out there in the
population that can’t be reached by telephone? How large a share of the
population is that uncovered group? Does the frame have numbers in it that while
legitimate telephone numbers are not connected in any way to a household or
person? Can a single telephone number connect you to multiple persons? And can
an individual in the population be reached by more than one telephone number on
the frame?

## “Using dual landline and mobile phone frames for telephone surveys is a fun counting game but can be challenging for survey organisations”

**UNSD:** _Great. Can we talk more about the sampling issues? In the book Survey
Methodology[^2] that you wrote together with your colleagues, there are details
on telephone frames in many countries, and even that there is more than one
frame in most cases. You also talk about sampling when there are two or more
frames, each of which has something to offer that the others do not. For
example, in some countries dual frames exist, like separate lists of landline
and mobile phone numbers. And many households and persons can be reached from
both at the same time. Could you say more about dual frame issues?_

**Jim:** Dual or multiple frame sampling had been around a while before it was
used in telephone surveys. At the time when the book was last edited (2009),
landline telephone surveys were widely used, but mobile phones had become more
and more common. A considerable proportion of people with landlines started to
have mobile phones. We also began to see people who couldn’t be reached by a
landline but could be reached by a mobile phone number. Worry arose that
telephone surveys would cover less and less of the population if the sampling
didn’t adapt to include people who couldn’t be reached by landline.

It turned out that in many cases landline numbers and mobile numbers were in
different frames. The greater challenge though was that you are calling mobile
phones and landlines some persons could be reached from either device. It's not
that they necessarily would be selected from both frames at the same time. It
was the potential, the probability that those on both frames at the same time
could end up in the sample. And those types of persons were being
over-represented in samples drawn from both frames.

One could try to disentangle the two frames, figuring out which persons were in
both and eliminating one of their entries from one or the other frame. Then the
frames would become like strata – non-overlapping. The “dual frame” sample then
would just be a stratified sample.

It was impossible to match the two frames and disentangle the multiple
probabilities of selection. However, one could rely on self-reports from
interviewed sample persons whether they could be reached by both a landline and
mobile phone number. Multiplicity weights could then be calculated to adjust
estimates for over-representation. It turned out to be kind of a fun counting
game, for those who are mathematically inclined. But the use of two frames, and
the weighting, was more complicated, and more challenging for survey
organizations to carry out.

## High penetration of mobile phones means many are moving to mobile only samples

**UNSD:** _It has been more than 10 years since the book was published. Has
anything changed since then regarding telephone interviews?_

**Jim:** Yes, one thing has changed a lot: the penetration of mobile phones as
people made the transition from no phone or landline phones to mobile phones.
That had three consequences for telephone surveys in many countries. First,
there is in many countries virtually 100 percent coverage of the entire
population by telephone, between landline and mobile phone access. Address-based
samples don’t have the coverage advantage they once had. Second, people in some
countries no longer use landline phones at all. For example, in the United
States about 60 percent of people have mobile phones only. In Finland it is 100
percent. Mobile phones have to be a part of telephone surveys. And lastly, in
some countries the percentage of the population that use landline phones only
(that is, they do not have a mobile phone) has shrunk, to less than 10 percent
in the United States, for example. That means some agencies and organizations
are moving to mobile-only samples, anticipating that noncoverage bias would be
small.

These consequences have led to an interesting reversal. It used to be in the
1970’s in the United States that landline frames did not cover 5-6 percent of
the population. For the sake of lower costs, many survey organizations just
called landline households and didn’t worry about the 5-6 percent noncoverage
problem. Now more than 90 percent of a population can be reached by mobile
phone. When sampling for a survey, many organizations are not bothering with
sampling landlines. They accept a less-than-10 percent noncoverage rate to
reduce the complexity of operating with two frames. Dual frame telephone
sampling is disappearing--it’s still around, but it is less important today than
it used to be.

Through discussion with colleagues in Egypt, particularly with my former student
Mahmoud Elkasabi (who is now working with Macro International), it was clear
that there are similarities between Egypt and the United States mobile phone
penetration is better than landlines in almost all countries.

## “Better understanding of the structure and coverage of the mobile phone frame is necessary”

**UNSD:** _How is the experience of the United States informing other
countries?_

**Jim:** It’s important to remember that in telephone sampling the sampling
method is going to be tailored, or fitted, to the frame available. The sampling
techniques we have were practical tools invented in some ways to deal with frame
properties that other techniques couldn’t deal with. Cluster sampling, for
instance, was developed in part as a response to situations where there were no
good population lists to use as a list frame. One needs to understand the frame,
and then think about what sampling techniques can be applied to it. That’s what
happened in United States telephone sampling

Still, there are common things to keep in mind about telephone frames across
countries.

All countries have a telephone numbering system that determines what telephone
numbers are being assigned to households and persons. The numbering system is
publicly known, allowing the creation of a virtual frame of all possible
telephone numbers in a country.

Almost universally the virtual telephone number frames are very “dirty”. A lot
of numbers, sometimes even a vast majority of the numbers on the virtual frame,
are not assigned to a household or person.

In addition, there are very few indicators in the telephone system that tell
whether a number is assigned to a household or person or not. Sometimes the
numbers are assigned to businesses, but that’s a small share of all possible
telephone numbers. And it’s not too difficult to identify those numbers, and
screen them out before sample is selected, or after a sample is selected. Maybe
later we can talk a little about trying to get better indicators of telephone
number status through telephone companies in a country.

The biggest problem is that often time a majority of those potential numbers are
not assigned at all, to households or persons, nor to businesses. When called we
only hear a ring-without-answer. We cannot distinguish easily and accurately a
number not assigned from a number that is assigned but not being answered. This
is a big common headache.

The result of these shared features of phone systems across countries is that
random digit dialing, or RDD, is just not going to be efficient. RDD in its
simplest form, of generating one of the potential phone number in the virtual
frame, at random, means that there is a huge proportion of randomly generated
telephone numbers whose status cannot be completely determined. A lot of time
could be spent dialing numbers that are simply blanks, not assigned to
households or persons.

This part of the system needs to be understood before frames can be explored.

What is important is to understand (a) the coverage of mobile phones before the
survey is being carried out; and (b) what does the frame look like. These vary
country by country and country-specific research needs to be done.

## “Without a list of phone numbers from the phone operators, random digit dialing (RDD) is still needed”

**UNSD:** _In terms of frames, can we talk about a little more about RDD? It is
not an easy task – taking the United States as an example. Random phone numbers
are generated based a fixed phone number structure in the country and then many
steps are needed to identify the assigned numbers, which could be a very small
portion of all generated numbers. Do we still need RDD if we have a list of
mobile phone numbers from the mobile operators or companies?_

**Jim:** Let’s start with considering why random digit dialing even comes up as
a sampling technique in telephone surveys.

If we had a list of phone numbers that are assigned to households or persons,
RDD wouldn’t be needed. We could sample randomly from the list, and even
stratify the list by things like geography.

But few countries have such lists. Most have multiple telephone carriers
providing telephone service. There typically is a national organization that
determines which carrier gets to use which telephone numbers in which part of
the county. There is no centralized repository for telephone numbers that are
actually connected to subscribers though. And it is very difficult in such cases
even for government agencies to get the cooperation of private company carriers
to provide phone numbers for landline or mobile phones in service. A few
countries have statistical agencies that do sampling of subscriber telephone
numbers, and they use stratified random sampling. But it’s not unusual to learn
that researchers in private companies or universities cannot get access to those
numbers.

For those researchers, and for everyone in the other countries without lists,
RDD is considered the sampling method to use. It is based on the virtual frame
of all possible phone numbers. But as we talked about before, there is typically
a big problem dealing with phone numbers in an RDD sample that are not assigned
to subscribers.

## Response rates for telephone interviews lower than for face-to-face interviews

**UNSD:** _Thank you Jim. The discussion on the telephone frame is quite
helpful. Now let’s get back to other aspects related to telephone interview. Is
the response rate to telephone interviews lower than face-to-face interviews?_

**Jim:** Telephone interviewing does generally have lower response rates
compared with face-to-face interviewing. I don’t know this for sure in
developing countries, but I do know that it is true in many. For example, I know
that telephone survey response rates are lower in many countries in the Middle
East. In Egypt frame problems and response rate issues were very similar to what
we experienced in the United States at the time. In Qatar in the Persian Gulf,
working with John Lee Holmes and Le Trung Kien, response rate and sampling frame
issues, although not necessarily at the same frequency, were not a lot different
from the United States.

## Collecting data through telephone surveys – is your respondent the best informant for household characteristics?

**UNSD:** _What type of information fits better with telephone surveys?_

**Jim:** It depends on whether you would need information from one person in the
household, or multiple persons. Would you allow for proxy responses? It is a lot
more complicated when the survey requires responses from multiple members in the
household.

**UNSD:** _How do you get information on household structure from an individual
if we start our interview from an individual rather than a household? This is
the case for telephone surveys (especially based on mobile phones). Household
structure is important, for example, to understand the living arrangement
situation within households under COVID-19._

**Jim:** Households have been useful in surveys because it is a convenient
sampling point to get to people. In many social sciences and other fields,
though, a household itself is usually not what you are interested in. If you are
interested in household characteristics such as living arrangement, you can
still ask the information from the individual respondent. But there is a
question about the reliability of the respondent report. You are talking to
someone through a phone – is he or she the best person to report such
information? Would there be a better informant in that household?

We have been fortunate with face-to-face interviews. For about 70 to 80 per cent
of households in the US surveys, women happen to be the first household
respondent. Women are in general more reliable informants about many household
composition and other characteristics than men. They may not be the best
respondent about finance or some economic issues. The informant may need to be
different for different kinds of data.

With mobile telephone interviews in the United States, you get more males
answering the phone. If you ask them about household composition, we may get
less reliable reports than if we had talked with a female in the household.
There could be increased response error for household characteristics in mobile
telephone surveys.

Ultimately you would have to see whether you would be willing to accept the fact
that the individual answering the phone might not be the best informant for
household characteristics. Accuracy of information can be improved by more
probing, which we are doing anyway. At the end of a household questionnaire
section, additional probing can be added to increase the chances that all
household members are re being included.

## Quality of data from telephone interviewing can be on a par with face-to-face

**UNSD:** _What about the quality of data collected from a telephone interview,
compared with data collected through face-to-face interviewing?_

**Jim:** We have a good deal of evidence that the reliability and validity of
data obtained by telephone is similar to that from face-to-face interviews.

## “Telephone interviewing can be flexible, using dispersed already trained and experienced staff to call from home”

**UNSD:** _What are other areas that we should be aware of when planning a
telephone interview?_

**Jim:** Telephone data collection may be centralized in call centers, changing
the labor market for interviewers. In a country with multiple languages, and
face-to-face interviewing, agencies or companies can hire interviewers locally
where respondents live, and some will speak languages or dialects in the
community. Centralized facilities may not be able to handle multiple languages
as readily. At the same time, survey organizations transitioning from
face-to-face to telephone interviewing may want to retain experienced field
staff, and greater language coverage. Telephone interviewing can be flexible,
using dispersed already trained and experienced staff to call from home, more
locally to the sample respondents. My organization at the University of Michigan
has a call center, small, about 50 stations. Most telephone interviewing is done
by staff hired locally to sample persons, calling from interviewer homes.

<Box mb={3}>
  <Img
    fluid={props.images[0]}
    title="Illustration on steps if switching surveys to telephone mode"
    alt="Illustration on steps if switching surveys to telephone mode"
  />
</Box>

_Jim Lepkowski is a Research Professor Emeritus in Survey Methodology at the
Institute for Social Research and the Department of Biostatistics at the
University of Michigan. He is also a Research Professor in the Joint Program in
Survey Methodology at the University of Maryland. His survey expertise includes
the design and analysis of survey samples, especially area probability and
telephone samples of households. Dr. Lepkowski conducted investigations into the
design of telephone samples, imputation to compensate for item missing data,
weighting to compensate for unit nonresponse, the interaction between
interviewer and respondent in the survey interview, and responsive survey
design. He was director of the University’s Institute for Social Research
graduate degree Program in Survey Methodology, the Summer Institute in Survey
Research Techniques, and the Sampling Program for Survey Statisticians._

[^1]:
    A mapping exercise recently conducted shows that around one-third of all SDG
    indicators (80 out of 232 indicators), covering 13 different goals, can be
    sourced from household surveys.
    [Achieving the Full Potential of Household Surveys in the SDG Era](https://unstats.un.org/unsd/statcom/50th-session/documents/BG-Item4c-ISWGHS-E.pdf),
    background document, Statistical Commission item 4c, 2019.

[^2]: Groves, et. al. (2004). Survey methodology.
