---
title: 'Surviving the COVID stress test: the leading experience of KOSTAT'
date: 2021-03-31
slug: surviving-the-covid-stress-test-the-leading-experience-of-kostat
description:
  South Korea’s success in combating COVID-19 certainly has many lessons to
  offer to the rest of the world, so has its national statistical system.  When
  the first shock of COVID-19 hit the country between early March to mid-April
  in 2020, Statistics Korea (KOSTAT) was at its busiest time preparing for a
  number of household surveys such as the household finances and living
  conditions survey and employment survey.
---

South Korea’s success in combating COVID-19 certainly has many lessons to offer
to the rest of the world, so has its national statistical system. When the first
shock of COVID-19 hit the country between early March to mid-April in 2020,
[Statistics Korea (KOSTAT)](http://kostat.go.kr/) was at its busiest time
preparing for a number of household surveys such as the household finances and
living conditions survey and employment survey. Due to the complex questionnaire
design, these surveys are usually carried out through face-to-face interviews.
The COVID-19 lockdown hence became a serious stress test for KOSTAT and its
household survey system.

KOSTAT is not alone in facing the COVID stress test. A
[survey](https://covid-19-response.unstatshub.org/statistical-programmes/covid19-nso-survey/)
conducted by the
[United Nations Statistical Division](https://unstats.un.org/home/) and the
[World Bank Development Data Group](https://data.worldbank.org/) in May 2020
found that 96 percent of national statistical offices either partially or fully
stopped face-to-face data collection at some point during the pandemic.

The statistical community has responded with leadership and inspiring stories of
innovation. Many national statistical offices have adopted
[innovative approaches and/or turned to alternative data sources](https://unstats.un.org/iswghs/task-forces/covid-19-and-household-surveys/national-responses-to-COVID-19/),
with most countries adapting household surveys from face-to-face to other modes
such as phone or web based surveys.

While COVID-19 will most likely be a catalyst for further innovation in
household survey programmes, it is important for us to reflect on what has been
done during this difficult period, what worked and what did not work so well,
and how we can improve moving forward towards sustainable, timely and
cost-effective data collection approaches. Documenting and sharing these
reflections with others will contribute greatly to the entire statistical
community.

This is why we reached out to Seoyoung Kim and her colleagues from Statistics
Korea (KOSTAT) for an expanded paper on what steps it has taken in their
household surveys during the pandemic. This follows an informative presentation
she delivered during a
[webinar](https://www.unescap.org/events/2021/asia-pacific-stats-cafe-series-covid-19-introducing-mode-effects-your-official)
in February 2021, jointly organized by the Inter-Secretariat Working Group on
Household Surveys (ISWGHS) and the Statistics Division of the Economic and
Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, on the impact of changing mode on
official statistics.

The [paper](./kostat-using-mixed-mode-in-household-surveys-amid-covid.pdf)
presents many important elements such as

- contingency planning for the household survey programme at the start of the
  pandemic,
- coordination between the central and regional statistical offices,
- the use of administrative records to validate and correct household survey
  data,
- assigning data collection mode to households and how the choice of the data
  collection mode varies by socioeconomic status of households,
- methods used to assess the mode effect.

At the end of the paper the authors reflect on the lessons learned and provided
a list of items that should be taken into consideration in the future. Notably,
they conclude that mixed mode data collection can be a good strategy, but
successful implementation brings various challenges beyond just developing the
tools for remote data collection.

We congratulate KOSTAT for its immediate and statistically robust response to
the challenge of COVID-19; and thank them for documenting and sharing their
experiences. The authors are also grateful for input from Mr. Kieran Walsh, ILO
Statistics Division; and for guidance from Francesca Perucci, United Nations
Statistics Division.

Key words: COVID-19 impact, COVID-19 contingency plan, mode effect, mixed-mode,
data integration

### Resources:

- Read the KOSTAT paper:
  [Using mixed modes for household surveys amid COVID: Lessons and implications from South Korea](./kostat-using-mixed-mode-in-household-surveys-amid-covid.pdf)
- [Statistics Korea](http://kostat.go.kr/portal/eng/index.action)
- Find out more about the ISWGHS
  [Task Force on COVID-19 and Household Surveys](https://unstats.un.org/iswghs/task-forces/covid-19-and-household-surveys/national-responses-to-COVID-19/)
- Visit the
  [Inter-Secretariat Working Group on Household Surveys](https://unstats.un.org/iswghs/)
  website
- UN Statistical Commission
  [request](https://unstats.un.org/unsd/statcom/52nd-session/documents/decisions/Draft-Decisions-Final-5March2021.pdf)
  for ISWGHS to promote sharing of national experiences for peer-to-peer
  learning (decision 14)
- [Is COVID-19 introducing mode effects into your official statistics](https://www.unescap.org/events/2021/asia-pacific-stats-cafe-series-covid-19-introducing-mode-effects-your-official),
  1 February 2021

---

### Authors:

_**Seo-young Kim** served as Director in Statistics Korea, and has been
currently working as Technical Advisor of Popula-tion and Development Branch in
UNFPA since August 2020. Seo-young has extensive experience in sta-tistical
methodology and the data analysis, including the integration of survey and
administrative data and studies on income inequality, wealth distribution and
poverty indicators. Seo-young has also worked on small area estimation for many
years, and she has been particularly participating UNFPA’s capacity
strengthening in census analysis, demographic dividend, and small area
estimation of SDGs, with a special focus on the fertility and well-being of
older persons. Seo-young has a PhD in Statistics from Chonnam National
University in South Korea._

_**Kyung Eun Lim** is a Director of Welfare Statistics Division in Statistics
Korea. For the past 7 years, she has led the Sampling Division. She worked on
sampling design for Household Surveys. She is an expert in sampling design,
survey method, and data analysis. She holds a Ph.D. degree in Statistics from
the Sookmyung Women's University in South Korea._

_**Taejick Lee** is a Deputy director of the Statistics Korea. He is in charge
of planning household finances and living conditions survey. Before he joined
the current position in August 2018, he has worked on various statistical areas
including vital statistics, register-based population censuses and population
projections. He holds a Master’s degree in Statistics from Chungnam National
University in South Korea._

_**Haoyi Chen** is the Coordinator of the Inter-Secretariat Working Group on
Household Surveys. She works on methodologies related to household surveys with
11 international agencies and 8 countries. Before she joined the current
position in September 2019, she led the programme on international migration
statistics. She has also worked on various statistical areas including gender
statistics, population censuses, civil registration and vital statistics. She
holds a Ph.D degree in Statistics from the University of Florida._

_**Gemma Van Halderen** is the Director of the Statistics Division of the UN
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific. She leads the
Commission’s capacity building programmes for data and statistics. Before
joining the UN, she was a member of the senior leadership team in the Australian
Bureau of Statistics and has more than 30 years of experience in official
statistical systems. She holds a Honours degree in Statistics from the
Australian National University._
